.\" Copyright © 2022, 2023
.\"	mirabilos <t.glaser@tarent.de>
.\" Licensor: Deutsche Telekom LLCTO
.\"
.\" Provided that these terms and disclaimer and all copyright notices
.\" are retained or reproduced in an accompanying document, permission
.\" is granted to deal in this work without restriction, including un‐
.\" limited rights to use, publicly perform, distribute, sell, modify,
.\" merge, give away, or sublicence.
.\"
.\" This work is provided “AS IS” and WITHOUT WARRANTY of any kind, to
.\" the utmost extent permitted by applicable law, neither express nor
.\" implied; without malicious intent or gross negligence. In no event
.\" may a licensor, author or contributor be held liable for indirect,
.\" direct, other damage, loss, or other issues arising in any way out
.\" of dealing in the work, even if advised of the possibility of such
.\" damage or existence of a defect, except proven that it results out
.\" of said person’s immediate fault when using the work as intended.
.\"-
.if \n(.g .hlm 0
.Dd September 13, 2023
.Dt TC\-MULTIJENS 8
.Os Linux
.Sh NAME
.Nm tc\-multijens
.Nd bespoke egress traffic scheduler for JENS
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm tc
.Ic qdisc ...\& Nm multijens
.Op Ic limit Ar PACKETS
.Op Ic rate Ar RATE
.Op Ic handover Ar TIME
.Op Ic qosmode Ar NUMBER
.Op Ic markfree Ar TIME
.Op Ic markfull Ar TIME
.Op Ic subbufs Ar NUMBER
.Op Ic fragcache Ar NUMBER
.Op Ic extralatency Ar TIME
.Ic uenum Ar NUMBER
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
qdisc is a, currently experimental, extension to the
.Xr tc\-janz 8
qdisc, whose documentation is included here by reference.
The difference is that
.Nm
uses the netfilter mark to distinguish traffic for multiple UEs while
.Nm tc\-janz
simulates the connection for exactly one UE
.Pq user equipment .
.Pp
The scheduling of the subqueues is currently a dumb round-robin
that starts at #0 when the qdisc is created and then iterates
through the subqueues, unfairly skipping those with no packets
to send until next time they are visited in order.
The same round-robin iterator is used when dropping.
.Pp
The parameters have the same meaning as in
.Nm tc\-janz ;
the new mandatory
.Ic uenum
parameter sets the amount of UEs to support.
UEs are mapped from the netfilter mark ranging from 0 to
.Ic uenum Ns \-1 ;
packets with netfilter mark outside of that range are mapped to UE #0.
The
.Ic limit
and
.Ic fragcache
parameters are global to the
.Nm
qdisc; the other parameters are individual to each
.Nm tc\-janz
subqueue, even if currently they can only be set on the parent qdisc
and therefore affect all subqueues at once; as a result,
.Ic subbufs
is technically global, too.
.Sh PARAMETERS
.Bl -tag -width XX
.It Ic limit
is a hard limit on the real queue size.
When this limit is reached, packets are dropped.
Default: 10240\ packets
.It Ic rate
is the bandwidth outgoing packets are limited to.
Default: 10\ Mbit/s
.It Ic handover
stops traffic for the specified amount of time.
.It Ic markfree
is the maximum queue delay packets are allowed to sojourn in the queue
without being ECN CE-marked.
Default: 4\ ms
.It Ic markfull
is the minimum queue delay at which packets will be marked (see above)
with 100% probability.
Default: 14\ ms
.It Ic qosmode
configures traffic priorisation according to its parameter:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width 0\&
.It Ic 0
.Pq Em default
IP
.Pq including Legacy IP
traffic starts out in the normal FIFO.
If
.Dv IPTOS_LOWDELAY
.Pq Li 0x10
is set, the packet moves up one priority to the lodelay FIFO.
If
.Dv IPTOS_THROUGHPUT
.Pq Li 0x08
is (additionally) set, the packet moves down one priority, that is,
to the normal or bulk FIFO.
.It Ic 1
Any IPv6 and IPv4 traffic goes to the normal FIFO like in the RAN.
.It Ic 2
IP packets with
.Li "ECT(1)"
or a
.Pq pre-existing
.Li \&CE
marking are sorted into the lodelay FIFO,
all other IP traffic into the normal FIFO.
.El
.Pp
Other traffic (not IP) is handled differently; the specifics are
implementation detail (e.g.\& ARP is priorised,
but most traffic is sorted into the normal FIFO).
.It Ic subbufs
enables debugfs functionality, for use with
.Nm jensdmp
or its Java\(rg wrapper.
Setting this to 1 will use a suitable default amount of subbuffers
.Pq currently 128 ;
any other value is used as number of subbuffers (containing 256 records,
each sized 64 bytes, that is, 16\ KiB per subbuffer).
This parameter can only be set at load time because memory has to be allocated.
Default: 1
.It Ic fragcache
sets the size of the IP packet fragment cache, in 64-byte structs.
This parameter can only be set at load time because memory has to be allocated.
Default: 128
.It Ic extralatency
adds artificial network-side
.Pq before Nm janz
latency.
Default: 0\ ms
.It Ic uenum
sets the number of UEs to simulate; this is currently limited to 2\(en256.
This parameter can only be set at load time because memory has to be allocated.
It is a mandatory parameter to
.Ic tc qdisc add .
.El
.Sh STATISTICS
This qdisc reports extensively via relayfs over debugfs; therefore, regular
.Xr tc 8
statistics are not provided beyond the bare minimum:
.Bl -tag -width XX -offset indent
.It backlog Pq \fBb\fRytes
amount of gross packet payload bytes, possibly adjusted by
.Xr tc-stab 8 ,
currently in the queue
.Pq FIFOs
.It backlog Pq \fBp\fRackets
basically
.Li sch\-\*(Gtq.qlen
.It overlimits
number of packets dropped because the queue length limit was reached
while enqueueing a new packet
.El
.Pp
Specifically, drops accounting in the gnet stats is not done.
.Sh EXAMPLES
Set up a queue with standard parameters and display its statistics:
.Bd -literal -offset 4n
$ \fBsudo tc qdisc add dev eth0 root handle 1: multijens uenum 8\fR\fC
$ \fBsudo tc \-s qdisc show dev eth0\fR\fC
qdisc multijens 1: root refcnt 2 limit 10240 rate 10000kbit \e
    qosmode 0 markfree 4ms markfull 14ms \e
    subbufs 1024 fragcache 1024 extralatency 0us uenum 8
 Sent 1196 bytes 2 pkt (dropped 0, overlimits 0, requeues 0)
 backlog 0b 0p
$ \fBsudo tc qdisc del dev eth0 root\fR\fC
.Ed
.Pp
.Em Note:
it is highly recommended to switch to
.Ic qosmode 1
.Pq see below .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr tc 8 ,
.Xr tc\-janz 8
.Pp
.Pa /usr/share/doc/sch\-jens\-dkms/README.gz
.Pp
.Pa /usr/share/doc/iproute2/examples/JensReaderDemo.java
.Sh AUTHORS
.An mirabilos Aq t.glaser@tarent.de
for Deutsche Telekom LLCTO
.Sh CAVEATS
This qdisc is only supported as the root egress qdisc on a device.
.Pp
This qdisc considers handles to be global, not per interface.
.Pp
The default queue limit is much too large, might want to adjust it,
accounting for the number of UEs.
With many UEs, however, the
.Ic subbufs
memory increases proportionally; the default sizing allows for 8 UEs at
the same memory usage of a
.Nm tc\-janz
in its default configuration.
.Pp
The traffic rate is internally converted to nanoseconds per byte
needed to transfer, limiting it to about 8 Gbit/s; the closer the
rate gets to the extremes, the less usable it will be.
Experiments with 128 kbit/s as a lower bound show mixed results.
To obtain the exact bandwidth in use, either run
.Ic tc Fl j Ic qdisc show
or do two 64-bit integer divisions: first divide 1000000000
by the amount of bytes (not bits!) per second, then divide
1000000000 by the result of the first division, resulting,
again, in bytes per second
.Pq or just read it from the relayfs channel .
Packet pacing for bandwidth limiting only applies, too, on egress.
.Pp
The
.Ic extralatency
is asymmetric: it is only applied on the egress channel, because
Linux cannot delay on ingress.
It is applied before enqueueing but does not affect sojourn time.
Basically, it simulates extra latency on the network in front of
the JENS node.
.Pp
The RAN does not use the IPTOS QoS bits to categorise traffic.
.Em \&Do not
use
.Nm
with any
.Ic qosmode
setting other than 1 (see
.Xr tc\-janz 8
.Sx CAVEATS
for a longer explanation).
